---
layout: article
scripts: my-fern-vanilla
libs: mathjs
article_header:
  type: cover
  image:
    src: /images/plant1.jpg
title: Flattery
---

If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, mathematicians must be very accustomed to paying compliments by the time they mature.

<!--more-->

# Progress Report

> My plan read "_write next blog by saturday_".

Well it's 4:10 AM on Sunday morning (which, yes does still count as Saturday) and I'm at the 24 hour McDonald's by the uni, celebrating[^1] -  because I am now ready to **begin** writing this blog.

Here's an uncontroversial opinion: Fight club was a pretty good film. For some reason, of all the themes in the film, what really sticks with me is Edward Norton's perfect apartment. It's become a big reference for me. Ed's condo gets blown to pieces and even though he loved it so, in the end he's thankful. He thought he had been making his life more and more perfect, but in the void after the fire, he realised that, rather than improving his life, he had become the possession of his possessions. By curating a life so exact in its comforts, by assigning such importance to every detail - every coffee cup, coaster, carafe - he suffered from an acute interior-design-related anxiety. An anxiety that he alone was responsible for creating, but nevertheless held him captive. To be unable to buy a new toothbrush because the handle must be rosewood (so as to match the cabinet doors) - Or: to be incapable of sleeping at a friend's because their bedsheets have not the sufficient thread count. That's the prison Norton had constructed for himself. And I think the film makes quite a persuasive argument, in this way, that possessions are not all that good. Edward Norton's case is extreme, but the message is clear, caring about this stuff is a bit silly, and really caring about it might drive you so mad that you get insomnia and, one day, find that your home has spontaneously combusted.

So Edward realises the error of his ways and begins beating up other men in pub basements. Hang on a minute, what was the moral of the story supposed to be again?

Anyway, the reason it's been a big reference for me - this conflict between curated comfort, and the liberty of holding nothing dear - is because I am Edward Norton before his apartment blows up. I have made my life very comfortable, in my very particular ways. I am always making it _more_ comfortable, and that suits me just fine most the time, until I remember that blazing fire, and Edward's sudden realisation.

I've never been able to stick to a routine, but I sure have built up a nice collection of _routines_, and I like to carry them out just-so. Like here, now, at McDonald's. I've only been in Hong Kong a little over two weeks (gee, that's actually a while isn't it?) but my order, the bubble tea and the 6 nuggets and fries, I think this is the fourth time I've got it. I will get it again, and in the exact same way. Same dips, same shaking spice. I will wear my favourite GAP hoodie (because the AC is a little too cold), I will put my phone in the inwards facing pocket of my Marimekko bum-bag. I will plug my chunky, curly corded headphones in and choose a playlist to listen to (or maybe just put my loves on shuffle). I know what does and does not go in every pocket. I could tell you now exactly what my pockets will contain a week from now. And when I finally get a stain on this jumper that won't come out, or wear a hole in this bum bag, drop my phone, or God forbid, McDonald's stops offering this promotion, I will find that really tough.

I think one area of my life I am most guilty of this almost-anxiety-inducing quest for aesthetics and convenience is with technology. I know just what I want! I am willing to endure so much frustration to be even the slightest bit less frustrated. This week has had quite a healthy amount of that productive time wasting, but you know what the upshot is? This works:

## The money shot

{% include components/canvas.html id="myCanvas" width="373" height="752" style="background-color:#e0e0e0;" %}
Number of points to generate fern with:
{% include components/number_input.html varname="N" funcbody="myFern({points: N})" default="100000" %}
{% include components/elem.html elemName="p" optionsString="class='info' id='myReport'" content="Try clicking submit!" %}

Which honestly I'm pretty chuffed with. Not just that I wrote some code that can make the fern - that was the least I needed to do to move on. No, also all the background stuff. I've not compromised a single thimble in the modern, stylish, Norton-esqe straitjacket of preferences about how I do this. I had to rearrange all the bookshelves, move the bed to the other side of the room, replace all chevrons with polka dots, but the end result; my little website setup - I can sleep soundly one more night with it like this.

# Debrief

I'm torn about how to write this blog, and the ones to come, because I want to:
1. talk about the impact that being here is having on me post lots of pictures, talk about life altering revelations I've had. A traditional, cliché travel blog you know. And **also**,
2. I want to write about my work, and use all the fancy terminology, and talk about all the fancy technology - really get into the weeds. 

I'm not sure about how much overlap there is between those two imagined audiences. Fortunately, since any audience for this blog _is_ imagined, I'll just write about whatever I want to.

## The Weeds

Within the weeds we still have two parts, the what you see, and the what you don't. The what you see is what I'm really here for, the maths. The end-product-program that can identify and codify self similar forms. The what you don't see is all the plumbing that makes it possible, and makes the communication of the results elegant and practical. These are the shoots and the roots.

### Shoots

The maths of this, it actually really baffles me. I'm hoping to get a better understanding of it in the coming week. I went into this thinking I knew how it worked but what I discovered this week was the exact line between what makes sense to me and what is very confusing to me. I'll try to explain.

#### What makes sense to me:

Like I described [in the last post](https://joelstrouts.com/2019/07/10/Working-in-Hong-Kong-Part-2.html), what it means to codify this self similar shape, the fern, (in a mathematical sense) is to write down these four affine transformations:

$$
\bbox[20px, border: 2px solid orange]{
\begin{align}
f_{1}(x,y)=\begin{bmatrix}0.00 & 0.00\\0.00 & 0.16\end{bmatrix}\phantom{-}&\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\end{bmatrix} \\
f_{2}(x,y)=\begin{bmatrix}0.85 & 0.04\\-0.04 & 0.85\end{bmatrix}&\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix}0,00\\1.60\end{bmatrix} \\
f_{3}(x,y)=\begin{bmatrix}0.00 & 0.00\\0.00 & 0.16\end{bmatrix}\phantom{-}&\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix}0,00\\1.60\end{bmatrix} \\
f_{4}(x,y)=\begin{bmatrix}0.00 & 0.00\\0.00 & 0.16\end{bmatrix}\phantom{-}&\begin{bmatrix}x\\y\end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix}0,00\\0.44\end{bmatrix}
\end{align}
}
$$

And what makes sense to me about that is that when we overlay boxes on our fern image - indicating how these transformations really effect the image - you can see how they relate to those patterns of self similarity which exist in the fern. One transformation which pushes everything one notch further up the main stem, one which maps the whole thing to a smaller copy just where the largest frond is on the right, and one which does the same on the left. The strangest to me is the 'first' transformation, however, just responsible for 'drawing' the initial stem that then successively copied to every other point.

Now I've got this visualisation working, we can see the impact each of these transforms have by looking at what happens to the final image when each is disabled:

{% include components/canvas.html id="myCanvas2" width="373" height="752" style="background-color:#e0e0e0;" %}
Number of points to generate (each) fern with:
{% include components/number_input.html varname="N2" funcbody="myFern2({points: N2, reportDiv: 'myReport2', canvas: 'myCanvas2'})" default="20000" %}
{% include components/elem.html elemName="p" optionsString="class='info' id='myReport2'" content="Try clicking submit!" %}

Or, we can too examine what happens when each transformation


### Roots

Having a website - embedding little interactive things in it, a place for my photos and my thoughts, it having good design but the design not getting in the way - that's a big deal for me. While the technology isn't really the point, it's the means, I want to appreciate and respect the technology because I've tried a bunch of different approaches before and none of them worked out for me quite like this before.


> bubble tea is pretty good. ive embraced that now.

[^1]: with the incredible: _6 nuggets, dip, large fries with shake spices, and bubble tea for 32HKD_ deal 
